Isoform-Specific Genetic Analysis of Epigenetic Machinery Genes in Neurodevelopment and Disease
Úlfur Benedikt Fjölnisson1, Katrín Möller1, Hans Tómas Björnsson1,2,3 
1: Department of Medicine University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Ísland; 2: Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA 3: University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland
Introduction
Missense mutations in epigenetic machinery (EM) genes are frequently associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. Studying the isoform-specific distribution of pathogenic variants and the timing of isoform expression may reveal critical mechanisms underlying these diseases.
Aims of the project
To determine whether pathogenic missense variants are enriched in coding material unique to non-canonical isoforms and whether these isoforms show stage-specific expression during neurodevelopment.
Methods
Data from ClinVar, gnomAD, and Ensembl BioMart data were used to compute missense variant densities in non-overlapping exons unique to a single isoform of EM genes and genome-wide. Whole-genome gnomAD data were used instead of exome data to ensure coverage of non-canonical exons, which are often underrepresented in exome sequencing. Fisher’s exact test with a FDR correction was used to identify exons enriched for pathogenic ClinVar variants. Isoform expression usage across neural progenitor cells (NPC), Day 3, Day 6, and Day 12 of mouse neurodevelopment was analyzed using ANOVA and Tukey’s HSD. A composite score combining expression significance and variant enrichment was used to prioritize candidate genes.
Results
The gene CHD3 ranked highest among genes from the whole genome analysis with a finite odds ratio. Its non-canonical isoform ENST00000682063 was also significantly upregulated on Day 12 of neurodevelopment. Pathogenic ClinVar missense variants were concentrated in specific protein domains of CHD3.
Conclusion
A non-canonical CHD3 isoform is upregulated during late neurodevelopment may explain why CHD3-related disorders lead to neurological symptoms. This work highlights the utility of considering transcript usage when doing variant analysis in uncovering overlooked disease mechanisms.
